it's my birthday this week so to
celebrate I thought I would compile a
list of my top ten unanswered questions
so these are a mix of questions I get
asked all the time by people who are
curious about space probably like
yourself watching this video or that I
think are the most interesting
unanswered questions and remember the
fact that we don't know the answer to
these questions is a good thing because
it means there's more to learn more to
know and more progress to be made you
might not agree with this list they'll
let me know in the comments below if you
think there is another unanswered
question that I have missed this is my
top 10 though I mean they're not
actually ranked in order even though the
numbered 1 to 10 I couldn't possibly
rank them at all I thought show
favoritism to objects in space
although anybody that actually knows me
at all will know that if I was really
hard-pressed the black hole questions
would win out in the end which is why
we're starting with number 1 what's
inside a black hole first up if you're
picturing a black hole is literally a
hole in space that stuff falls into and
is lost forever stop it's not a hole a
black hole is a place in space that has
so much stuff in it that it's the
heaviest thing in the universe black
holes grow by eating or what we call
accreting more matter so really I guess
we should be calling them Black
Mountains because they're essentially
these huge piles of matter in the
universe that we can't see because we'll
never get any information from them
because their gravity is so strong that
light can't escape the question is
though obviously what happens to the
matter that crosses the event horizon of
a black hole that adds to that mountains
mass unsurprisingly we don't really know
the best clue we have is sort of from
the Pikachu to a black holes right you
write this sort of pre evolution side of
things is a neutron star a neutron star
is the
after the core of a star that's crushed
down so much though all you're left with
is neutrons that are as tightly packed
together as they possibly can be
the thing is though if you keep adding
more and more mass to that you
eventually the gravity is so strong that
it overcomes the forces stopping the
neutrons being squashed together and
then that's when you have a black hole
but of course because we can't observe
what that matter looks like because we
can't get light from it we have no idea
what form it takes once it gets squished
maybe it is a whole new form of matter
that we don't know about maybe it turns
back into pure energy because e equals
MC squared as Einstein said but then
again maybe we'll just never know next
up what is the universe expanding into
we don't know it's a bit of a misnomer
that question because technically it's
not a logical question to ask
so yes the Big Bang created everything
in the universe that we see around us
but it also created time and space
itself they didn't exist before the Big
Bang if space only exists in the
universe then asking what the universe
is expanding into doesn't make sense
because you're asking for a location and
a location can only be found in space
which doesn't exist outside the universe
now having said that there are a lot of
hypotheses floating around the
theoretical astrophysics community that
there are multiverses ie our universe is
not alone there is not just one single
universe there are many universes and
ours is just one of many and so that as
ours expands the universe is that we are
somehow connected to around us they
contract because we're expanding into
them perhaps that's purely theoretical
though and it probably always will be
but never say never you know physicists
might think of some clever way of saying
if these exist it would mean this in our
own universe and we can test for that
but this idea of an expanding universe
leads us to our next question what is
dark energy or to put it another way
what is causing the expansion of the
universe what we do know though is that
the universe is definitely expanding
when we look out into space on average
all galaxies are moving away from us and
that really was the smoking gun evidence
for the theory of the Big Bang but it
doesn't explain why that expansion is
happening there must be some force or
energy that's pushing the universe out
that's causing space to expand now we
call that energy dark energy but just
because it has a name doesn't
necessarily mean we know what it is we
don't even know any of its properties
either all we know is that it's exerting
this negative pressure ie a pressure
pushing outwards counteracting gravity
and it's currently winning that fight
speaking of dark things next up is what
is dark matter made of we don't know now
unlike dark energy we actually know a
lot more about dark matter and its
properties I made a video a couple of
months ago on the history of how
scientists but grudgingly came to the
conclusion after you know decades worth
of research the 85% of all the matter in
the universe was actually this dark
matter dark matter is essentially matter
that doesn't interact with light so it
doesn't absorb light it doesn't emit
light or it doesn't reflect light either
so that means we can't see it but just
because we can't see it doesn't mean we
don't know it's there you ever seen a
million dollars no think about the wind
right you can't see the wind but you see
the trees move and so you know it's
there so we have a lot of similar
evidence but in space of dark matter
existing because it interacts by a
gravity and that's how we know that it's
there and from those observations we've
been able to
a couple of its properties the thing is
those properties don't line up with any
of the types of particles that particle
physicists know about so it's obviously
some type of matter that we have never
thought up before if we could detect
them here on earth then we might have
half a chance but until then we're gonna
be as ignorant as humanity was say two
three hundred years ago when we didn't
know about atoms we knew that we existed
but we didn't know what we were made of
sticking on the matter theme the next
question is where is all the antimatter
no wonder I did a recent video on this
but I still wanted to include it in here
because I think it's such an important
question now unlike dark matter which is
incredibly abundant in the universe you
know 85% of all the matter in the
universe antimatter is incredibly rare
and that's the big question
why is it so rare so antimatter is
essentially the opposite of normal
matter so if you took an electron which
if you remember high school physics is
the particle that goes round the centers
of atoms electron has a negative charge
if you had an anti electron which is
called a positron it would have a
positive charge it would be it anti
particle and if the two of those things
met they would cancel each other out and
they were turned back into pure energy e
equals mc-squared energy and mass are
the same thing according to Einstein and
we call that process
annihilation now all of our scientific
theories predict that in the Big Bang
there should have been equal amounts of
matter and equal amounts of antimatter
made there was no preference to make one
or the other if that's the case though
then everything should have just denial
a didn't turn back into pure energy
again but obviously that didn't happen
because we're now surrounded by universe
made of matter antimatter is still made
in natural processes like radioactive
decay in fact bananas are a massive
source of these anti electrons
the thing is they just don't hang around
for very long before they end up meeting
a normal electron and turning back into
pure energy again so people are still
trying to figure out in these huge big
particle physics experiments like there
isn't CERN why more matter than
antimatter was created in the Big Bang
sticking on the Big Bang theme the next
question is what happened in the first
naught point naught naught naught naught
1 seconds of the universe or to put it
another way 1 times 10 to the minus 43
seconds because I don't want to say 42
zeroes all over again not only do we not
know we don't even have the maths to
know this one because at that point the
temperature and pressures in the
universe are so high that the four sort
of fundamental forces of physics so
gravity electromagnetism the strong and
the weak force that look after sort of
binding atoms together in radioactivity
they all merge to just become one like
mega force and then nothing behaves like
it should do anymore in fact if you use
Einstein's theory of general relativity
which best theory is you know it
describes nearly everything we see in
the universe in terms of gravity anyway
and you try and use that theory to
predict what is happening at that time
you end up with what's called a
singularity so people might have heard
of that term in reference to black holes
where you have an infinite amount of
matter in an infinitely small space same
is true here but it could be an infinite
pressure an infinite temperature and in
for an amount of matter in an infinitely
small space what ends up happening is
you have to divide by zero and we know
that mathematicians do not like dividing
by zero but even general relativity is
probably thought to break down at that
time especially if the four forces
merged into that one big mega force
because then it wouldn't describe
everything properly but also because
there's probably loads of quantum
effects that dominate on really
tiny scales which it probably can't
describe properly now you're probably
okay with not knowing what happened in
the first one times 10 to the minus 43
seconds if the University of probably
not losing any sleep over it but you can
bet the theoretical astrophysicists well
they definitely are moving on from the
Big Bang by a couple of hundred million
years or so up next is what came first
the galaxy or the black hole we don't
know so after the universe has been
around for a couple hundred million
years or so and you know everything's
had time to just chill out particles of
had chance to form atoms have had chance
to form
everything started clumping together
under gravity no dark matter in normal
matter and stars might begin to form the
question is what came first though then
did a collection of stars form ie a
galaxy did one of them go supernova it
become a black hole and then start to
take in more matter and grow and grow
until it became the heaviest thing in
that collection of stars so it sunk to
the center and over time grew into the
supermassive black hole that we know
exists at the center of every galaxy I
actually did a video on how we know that
about a year ago was actually one of my
favorite videos I've ever made so go try
that out if you're interested or the
other option is instead of gas clouds in
the early universe collapsing to form
stars first what if those gas clouds
directly collapsed into quite a large
black hole in the first place and then
stars started to form around it in a
galaxy so the black hole was always in
the center from the very beginning it's
kind of like the astrophysics equivalent
of the chicken or the egg I guess then
there's actually been hints that direct
collapse into a black hole of say 10,000
times the mass of the Sun in the very
early universe could actually be
happening is in we actually have
observational evidence of that happening
from the Hubble Space Telescope which
has got a lot of people really excited
and whilst that single observation is
very promising
you can bet we're going to need more
than one thing to turn that hypothesis
into fully accepted scientific theory
and now something completely different
what causes
fast radio bursts if you haven't heard
of fast radio bursts yeah well get ready
because your minds about to be blown
they are incredibly short like
millisecond bursts of radio waves coming
from space we've been able to pinpoint
their locations they're coming from all
across the sky from all different areas
and we know just shy of a hundred or so
of these fast radio bursts and we still
don't have an explanation for them
they're kind of this generations pulsars
right pulsars were these very regular
bursts of radio waves that we're coming
from space that we eventually figured
out where neutron stars that were
rotating and they had this sort of beam
of radio waves coming out of the poles
and they were acting a little bit like
lighthouses when they first discovered
pulsars they nicknamed them LG my little
green men because they thought they were
aliens and obviously once again fast
radio bursts everyone's like the little
green matter back but I hate to
disappoint guys but it's never a lien
but unlike pulsars these things are not
regular some of them we just got one
burst from them and never heard from
them again some of them we have seen
them repeat except they've repeated with
no pattern whatsoever so the number of
hypotheses just floating around it's
just there's hundreds of them everything
from supernovae to gamma-ray bursts to
black holes two neutron stars to magnet
arts to Blitzers there's so many weird
exotic things that people are coming up
with to try and get an explanation for
what we're seeing it's likely that it
probably is something to do with these
magnetized or blitzer something where
you've got a very high magnetic field
that's maybe producing these radio waves
but the long-running joke in
astrophysics is that we don't understand
magnetic fields which is probably why
this question is still unanswered which
brings me nicely to my next question why
does the sun's magnetic field flip every
11 years we don't know so the Sun
actually goes through an 11-year cycle
where I'll have a period of peak
activity where I'll have loads of
sunspots and it'll
burp off a load of high-energy particles
that gives us really spectacular Aurora
on here on earth and then it'll go
through a period of a lot quieter
activity on this 11-year cycle
and combined with that the magnetic
field every 11 years sort of dies off
and shrinks down and then it goes down
to sort of nothing and then it bounces
back again but with the North Pole
switch to the South Pole and the South
Pole switch to the North Pole and this
is nothing to worry about it last
happened in 2013 I'm sure you'd never
even noticed it happening it also
happens here on earth though as well but
nowhere near as regularly it's only
happened on earth something like 80
times in the past 183 million years that
we know of at least and we think we know
what's causing that as well because the
earth has a liquid iron core and moving
liquid metal sets up a magnetic field
and so if you disturb that movement
somehow either with an impact or because
of like tectonic plates and volcanoes
and earthquakes and whatever then you
might disrupt that movement and
therefore start this sort of shift of
the magnetic field but on the Sun you've
got this regular periodic flipping every
11 years that we just can't explain
normally because we don't have a very
good model of what's going on inside the
Sun it's one of the reasons that people
are still studying the Sun in so much
detail because even though it's our star
at a local neighborhood of space we know
very little about it relatively anyway
we know a lot more about it than we do
other stars but it's one of the reasons
why say ESA's solar orbiter has just
been launched and NASA's Parker Solar
Probe as well they're some of the
missions that are trying to find out
more and more about the Sun so that we
can answer this question and many more
just like it
and finally the question that humans
have been asking for millennia does life
exist on other planets are we truly
alone in our universe
honestly personally I don't think we'll
ever know
having said that statistically I do
think it is likely that life exists out
there somewhere you know we are one
planet around one star of hundreds of
billions of stars in our galaxy the
Milky Way there is an uncountable number
of galaxies out there trillions
quadrillions of galaxies all containing
hundreds of billions of stars I think it
would be incredibly incredibly arrogant
of us to assume that we are the only one
planet that managed to have the right
conditions for life the problem is how
we'd ever confirm that life existed on a
planet elsewhere like think about it
imagine if we found a planet that was
almost identical to earth you know the
same mass same size same length of year
and it was orbiting a star that was
almost identical to the Sun and we found
the same signatures in its atmosphere as
we have in our own atmosphere what then
would that be enough to conclude that
life existed on that planet I don't
think it would be I think you definitely
found the candidate for the most
earth-like planet elsewhere in our
galaxy but I don't think you could say
for definite whether life existed on it
or not and you might just say okay Becky
well let's just go to that planet and
find out but what if that planet is say
tens hundreds or even thousands of
light-years away
what then but you might think that's
fine we'll just kick back and wait for
them to come to us
hopefully peacefully but they're gonna
be limited by the same laws of physics
we are they still can't go faster than
the speed of light just like us so if
they're coming from the other side of
the galaxy then you know we better hope
they left when the dinosaurs were still
alive
so despite being the biggest question of
them all and one that yeah I would love
to definitively answer it's one I think
we just all will have to accept that we
might never know the answer to that yeah
editing Becky here just before we get to
the bloopers I want to take a minute
this week's sponsor brilliant brilliant
is a problem-solving website that gets
you to learn by doing not just by
watching youtube videos so one of the
things I always get asked or told is
that someone wants to be an
astrophysicist but maybe they feel like
they're no good at math so they're no
good at physics well if you said to me
that your dream in life is to become the
first chair violated in an orchestra but
you're no good at violin then I'd tell
you to pick up a violin and practice
practice practice and so brilliant
allows you to do just that but for your
maths and your physics if you want to
take your knowledge of physics or math
maybe like special activity or gravity
or you want to learn more about how
stars evolve then brilliant is for you
it teaches you to think like a scientist
breaking down problems into
easy-to-understand chunks with
interactive problems that give them this
fun application so you know how to apply
the knowledge that you're actually
learning so if you like the sound of
that then go to brilliant org forward
slash dr. Becky that's dr bees DK why
and sign up for free plus the first 200
people that go to that address will also
get 20% off an annual premium
subscription - it is sponsorships like
this from brilliant that allow me to
keep chatting science with all of you
guys and for you lot to take your
interest in science further so head over
there and give them a big thank you for
me change in the battery
it's Sunsail to the stem that's like a
parody of a parody some weird one Becky
anywho where was I oh yeah don't matter
so one of the things I always get asked
emails dm's whatever it might be oh my
arm
you